\marios{In this section we need to show you read and understood the area. This is where most of your references will come from.}
\section{Kernel-bypassing}
\marios{IX, Arrakis, DPDK, SPDK, NetBricks, etc. Why we do that? What's the benefit? Problems? Main applications? kv-stores. Thus, we can codesign the networking stack and the application.}

NetBricks~\cite{netbricks} is a Rust framework built on top of DPDK,
aiming to provide isolated software defined network functions while
eliminating the need for virtualization.

\section{Transport protocols for RPCs}

The choice of transport protocol is critical to performance when
designing an RPC protocol. Providing reliability is critical in
ensuring that the application behaves as expected. However ensuring
reliability usually involves creating copies of the data sent through
the network to be able to retransmit it if needed. This makes the
latency dependent on the size of data

\marios{TCP, UDP, R2P2, reliable vs non reliable and implications to
  the application behaviour. Reliability is where copies come from. We
  need reliability though. Can we eliminate copies?}

\section{Rust}

Rust is a systems programming language from Mozilla Research, stemming
from Mozilla's dissatisfaction with C++. As of today several parts of
Firefox's rendering engine, Servo, have been rewritten in Rust after
the language was deemed mature enough to do so. Rust is engineered to
provide a lot of safety guarantees, notably memory and concurrency
safety through its type system thereby eliminating a lot of common
problems in systems programming.

The strong Rust guarantees also speed up development significantly by
eliminating whole categories of bugs. Most importantly, Rust's type system
eliminates use-after-free, double-free, invalid pointers, memory leaks
and data-races. Overall, the time writing code is increasing since the
compiler will often refuse straight out to compile code that
potentially violates its guarantees. The counter-part to this is that
the time spent debugging is very much reduced. This is particularly
useful when tracking down data race bugs which are notoriously hard to
diagnose. Those kind of bugs are usually found much later in the
development cycle and are usually quite hard to reproduce since they
depend on a certain scheduling of the execution.

We make the claim that Rust~\cite{rustbook} is a better suited
language than C for kernel bypass networked applications. The safety
guarantees Rust brings are very well suited for this kind of
applications, while the performance loss (if any) is negligible. As an
additional benefit Rust allows code to be much more concise and
abstract while drastically cutting down on the memory and concurrency
bug tracking time. Its memory management model will also prove
invaluable when ensuring integrity of data in between the networking
stack and the user application.

As a proof of concept we implement a key-value store on top of
DPDK in order to prove that it is doable as well as reasonable,
performance-wise, to use Rust in this kind of scenario.


\section{Memory safety}

One of the most important feature of Rust is its guarantee of memory
safety, providing both the speed of manual memory management and the
safety of garbage collected languages.

To provide this feature, Rust introduces a new concept called
lifetimes and makes raw pointers second class citizens. These raw
pointers (such as that of C) can't be dereferenced since the compiler
can't guarantee that they are valid. Pointers are hard to validate and
verify statically mostly because of pointer arithmetic. References, on
the other hand, are guaranteed to always point to a valid memory
location. Like the references in C++, references in Rust do not allow
pointer arithmetic, they can only be created from a variable, which
ensures that the referenced memory is valid.

Lifetimes are the central part of Rust's memory safety
guarantees. They work in conjunction with references to ensure
that references are used correctly (i.e.\ not after the value they
refer to has been destroyed), since they allow the compiler to tell
when a reference might outlive the value it refers to. The combination
of lifetimes and references thus eliminate the dangling pointers
problem entirely. Lifetimes are Rust's way of eliminating the need for
garbage collection while not requiring users to manually manage
memory. A lifetime gets attached to each variable created, the
compiler then analyzes the control flow of the program to ensure that
references or values derived from that first value (such as reference
to a struct member) are not used after the value is destroyed.

However Rust is a at the core a systems programming language so we
need some way to bypass the safety restrictions it provides. This is
where the \textbf{unsafe}~\cite{rustonomicon} keyword comes in. This
keyword provides a way to tell the Rust compiler that a piece of code
upholds the memory safety guarantees even though the former can't
verify  statically that it does. Handling of raw pointers and call to
foreign functions are cases where the use of \textbf{unsafe} is
required. Indeed other languages do not provide any of Rust's
guarantees and do not know about lifetimes. This problem also occurs
when developing kernels~\cite{rust-os}~\cite{redox}.

\section{Concurrency safety}

Rust's type system also provides protection against data-races, a
common problem when using C usually solved through atomic operations
and locks. While it is possible to solve this kind of problems in C,
it requires careful design and is an error-prone task. Rust therefore
allows quicker and safer development of concurrent software. This safety
does not come for free though. In order to guarantee that there is no
data-race anywhere, Rust only allows either one mutable reference or
any number of immutable reference to any given variable. By doing
that, the compiler can ensure that the variable will only be read
concurrently or written exclusively.

Even though we speak of concurrency safety, Rust does not provide
protection against deadlocks. This is far too complex a task for
static analysis in a compiler since it requires costly call graph
analysis and sometimes produces false
positives~\cite{deadlock-detection}.

However, the Rust standard library provides safe ways to mutate shared
variables. As an example the RwLock standard library structure allows
creating mutable reference to a value from an immutable RwLock instance.

\section{Performance}

Being a systems programming language, performance is critical to
Rust. All the aforementioned guarantees are enforced statically so
they do not incur any performance penalty. Removing pointer aliasing
from the language also allows the compiler to do many optimizations
that are not feasible safely in C or C++. As to the performance of the
generated assembly code, Rust utilizes the LLVM compiler
infrastructure and thus benefits from all the work that was done
there. Rust also features what the Rust developers call 0-cost
abstraction. Idiomatic Rust makes heavy use of closures, and that
would incur, in some languages, a slight degradation of
performance. But, in Rust, closure can be, most of the time, inlined
thus making as if the programmer wrote the concrete code while
allowing the interface to remain abstract.

In this regard, Rust combines the best of both worlds, high-level
readable and abstract code while also having performance close to that
of other systems programming languages.

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "master"
%%% End:
